---
title: "Baleen whale inhalation variability revealed using animal-borne video tags"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2022-07-20-nares
excerpt: 'Baleen whale breath to breath variability observed from video recordings of inhalations.'
date: 2022-07-20
venue: 'PeerJ'
paperurl: 'http://emilynazario.github.io/files/nazario_2022.pdf'
citation: 'Nazario, Emily C., Cade, Dave E., Bierlich K.C., Czapanskiy, Max F., Goldbogen, Jeremy A., Kahane-Rapport, Shirel R., van der Hoop, Julie M., San Luis, Merceline T., Friedlaender, Ari S. (2022). &quot;Baleen whale inhalation variability revealed using animal-borne video tags.&quot; <i>PeerJ</i>. 1(3).'
---

Empirical metabolic rate and oxygen consumption estimates for free-ranging whales
have been limited to counting respiratory events at the surface. Because these observations
were limited and generally viewed from afar, variability in respiratory
properties was unknown and oxygen consumption estimates assumed constant breathto-
breath tidal volume and oxygen uptake. However, evidence suggests that cetaceans
in human care vary tidal volume and breathing frequency to meet aerobic demand,
which would significantly impact energetic estimates if the findings held in free-ranging
species. In this study, we used suction cup-attached video tags positioned posterior
to the nares of two humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae) and four Antarctic
minke whales (Balaenoptera bonaerensis) to measure inhalation duration, relative nares
expansion, and maximum nares expansion. Inhalation duration and nares expansion
varied between and within initial, middle, and terminal breaths of surface sequences
between dives. The initial and middle breaths exhibited the least variability and had the
shortest durations and smallest nares expansions. In contrast, terminal breaths were
highly variable, with the longest inhalation durations and the largest nares expansions.
Our results demonstrate breath-to-breath variability in duration and nares expansion,
suggesting differential oxygen exchange in each breath during the surface interval. With
future validation, inhalation duration or nares area could be used alongside respiratory
frequency to improve oxygen consumption estimates by accounting for breath-tobreath
variation in wild whales.
